# Turing Machine Application

This project aimed to implement a K-tape Turing Machine, based on the definition I've learned during the course of "Informatica Teorica" (Mainly Theory of Computability and Theory of Complexity) at University of Florence "UniFI", both as a set of C++ libraries as well as a GUI app.

## Installation

There is no need for any installation, the libraries (for the simulations) are header only and the app is already builded (at least for Windows now)

## Usage
As I previously said, the project is divided into a GUI app, for creating and editing Turing Machines that can be executed, a simple binary to generate an example of a simulation runner and the set of libraries.

### App
The GUI app uses a combination of ImGui + ImNodes + ImGuiFileDialogs + GLFW + OpenGL3. It can be used to create, save, load and edit Turing Machines.

### Binary generator
Since the Turing Machine is implemented with K as a template argument, I couldn't create one runtime with the needed K. So I thought of creating an executable that is used to generate a simple simulation runner based on the given 'K', it searches if the executable "turing_machine_K" exists, if it doesn't, it uses a template simple cpp file to generate that particular binary. Still, the most flexible way to use these libraries is to just include them and use them, with a known K, in the code.

```bash
Example
./binary_generator 3
./turing_machine 3 machine.json alphabet.json tape.json
```
The executable takes 3 file paths as command line arguments, that are a Turing Machine, Alphabet and Tape, serialized to a json (this can be done using the `helper.h` header, these are also generated by the GUI app when we hit `Save` and the machine is correctly configured.

### Libraries
The 'big' part of this project are the libraries, that can be found under the `header`folder, these include `turing_machine`, `tape`, `alphabet`, `definitions`, `helper` and `computation`:

#### Turing Machine
This class just holds the logic behind a Turing Machine, just number of states, number of symbols, final states and the list of transitions, represented as quadruples, where the shift can be specified as output symbol, `L` for left movement and `R` for right movement. Since states and symbols are finite, they are numerable, so we treat each as just an integer.

#### Tape
This class represents a tape that can be used by a Turing Machine during a computation. For the same reason as before, this works with symbols as integers. The correct way to use this class is through `read`, `write`, `move_left` and `move_right`.

#### Alphabet
This class is used as a bridge between logical symbols (integers, as before) and readable symbols (characters), just so we can use a more readable approach when definining a computation, rather than just with integers.

#### Definitions
Just some definitions that are globally valid for all the libraries, symbols start from 0 so the `blank` symbol is -1, the `blank char` or `empty cell` is `*`, because we used this during class. Moreover, as left and right are treated as machine symbols, each has its own definitions, so the Turing Machine has the methods `sx` and `dx` that return the corresponding shift symbol. If a Machine has `n` symbols, from `0` to `n-1`, then `R` = `n` and `L` = `n + 1`.

#### Helper
A library that can be used to serialize Turing Machines, Alphabets and Tapes to json, as well as deserialize them from json, using nlohmann json library.

#### Computation
This class is what actually is used to `execute` a Turing Machine on a certain input string. We just create a computation, specifying the same number of tapes as the machine, then we set the Machine to use. We can specify a tape, to have an already initialized tape , or not set one, so it is created blank, and we can specify an alphabet, to read and write from and to the tapes directly using std::strings istead of symbols, as the alphabet is used for that translation. The alphabet is needed if we don't use an already initialized tape, as we wouldn't be able to give input. We can then start, stop, pause, resume the execution, as it is being performed on a separate `jthread` (this is the only class that requires `C++20`, all the others should be fine with `C++17`). There are also flags that specify if the computation ended naturally (`terminated`), manually (`stopped`), and if it was accepting (`terminated` + machine ended on a final state)

## Contributing

Pull requests are welcome. For major changes, please open an issue first
to discuss what you would like to change.

## License

MIT License

Copyright (c) 2025 Biribò Francesco

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.
